MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 020-9 





ENGINE OIL SERVICE 


The OIL SERVICE light in the service interval indicator 
should be the basic guide to scheduling oil changes. The oil 
service light should come on at or before 7,500 miles. If the 
car is used primarily for short trips in slow moving traffic, or 
routinely operated aggressively, the oil service light should 
come on earlier. 


Engine oil and filter, changing 


NOTE — 

There are two different types of oil filter mountings, de- 
pending on model. On 525i models with the M20 en- 
gine, the filter is the spin-on type. On all other models, 
a cartridge type filter is used. The procedure below cov- 
ers both types of filters. 


1. Run engine for a few minutes to warm engine and then 
turn engine off. 


2. With car on level ground, place a drain pan under oil 
drain plug. See Fig. 3. 





0011911 


Fig. 3. Engine oil drain plug (arrow) in oil sump. 
NOTE — 
The car will not need to be raised if a shallow drain pan 
is used. 


3. Using a socket or box wrench, loosen drain plug from 
bottom of oil sump. By hand, remove plug and let oil 
drain into pan. 





CAUTION — 

+ Pull the loose plug away from the hole quickly to 
avoid being burned by the hot oil. It will run out 
quickly when the plug is removed. 


+ Use gloves to protect your hands. 





4. When oil flow has diminished to an occasional drip, re- 
install drain plug with a new metal sealing washer and 
tighten plug. 





Tightening Torques 

* Engine oil drain plug to oil sump 
MTA DOI ricinus tate Soci eaialent 25 Nm (18 ft-lb) 
M22 OOM araris avieeee ses Ta ak 60 Nm (44 ft-lb) 








5. Remove oil filter: 


* On M20 engines, position drain pan directly under the 
oil filter and loosen spin-on filter by turning clockwise. 
+ On all engines except M20 engine, loosen oil filter cov- 
er or oil filter cover mounting bolt.Install new oil filter: 


* On M20 engines, wipe oil filter mounting flange clean. 
Lubricate rubber gasket of new oil filter with light coat- 
ing of clean engine oil. Install filter by hand until gas- 
ket contacts mounting flange, then turn filter another 
"fp turn. 

* On all engines except M20 engine, remove old O- 
ring(s) from cover and from end of bolt, as applicable. 
Lubricate and install new O-rings in filter cover and on 
filter bolt (M50,M30 engines only). Install new filter 
cartridge and cover. See Fig. 4. 





0011912 


Fig. 4. BMW oil cartridge filter for M50 engine. When purchasing orig- 


inal equipment filter, sealing rings and O-rings are normally in- 
cluded. 





Tightening Torque 

* Oil filter cover to oil filter housing 
M10:0F: M12 DOlt sii. 6 5 c.6e se coe ae 33 Nm (24 ft-lb) 
screw-on cover ...........--.4-- 25 Nm (18 ft-lb) 








CAUTION — 

Overtightening the oil filter will make the next 
change much more difficult, and may deform the 
gasket, causing leaks. 








6. Refill crankcase with oil. Check oil level when finished 
adding oil. Oil specifications are found under Fluid and 
Lubricant Specifications. 


ENGINE OIL SERVICE 


020-10 MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 





7. Start engine and check that oil pressure warning light 
immediately goes out. Allow engine to run for a few 
minutes to circulate new oil. Check for leaks at drain 
plug and oil filter. Stop engine and recheck oil level. 





CAUTION — 

« Dispose of used oil properly. Use tight-sealing 
containers and mark them clearly. Check with 
the place of purchase about disposal. 


+ If the oil pressure warning light does not immedi- 
ately go out after the engine is started, quickly 
turn the engine off. Loosen the oil filter or filter 
cover slightly. Restart the engine. As soon as oil 
begins to run out of the filter or filter cover, turn 
the engine off and tighten the filter or cover. This 
will release any trapped air that is blocking oil 
flow. 











ENGINE COMPARTMENT MAINTENANCE 


Air filter element, replacing 


The specified maintenance intervals for replacing the air fil- 
ter element are based on normal use. If the car is operated pri- 
marily in dusty conditions, the air filter should be serviced 
more frequently. A dirty air filter starves the engine for air, re- 
ducing power output and increasing fuel consumption. 


NOTE — 

On M20 and M50 engines, the air filter housing is in the 
left front corner of the engine compartment. On M30 
and M60 engines, the air filter housing is in the front 
right corner of the engine compartment. 


The upper and lower parts of the air filter housing are fas- 
tened together with spring clips around the outside edge. To 
replace the air filter element and unfasten the clips as neces- 
sary. Separate the upper air filter housing from the lower part 
just enough to remove the filter element. See Fig. 5. 





Fig. 5. Air filter housing in front left (driver's) side of MSO engine com- 
partment. Unclip spring clips (arrows) to remove air filter. 


ENGINE COMPARTMENT MAINTENANCE 


Take note of the installed position of the filter. Wipe clean 
the inside of the air filter housing using a lint-free cloth and in- 
stall the new filter. Reinstall the upper air filter housing, mak- 
ing sure that the two halves are mated correctly. Refasten the 
spring-clips and tighten the mounting nuts. See Fig. 6. 





0011919 


Fig. 6. Air filter being removed from air filter housing. Air filter housing 
will vary slightly between models. 





WARNING — 

When reinstalling a used air filter element, reinstall 
the filter in the same position that it was in before re- 
moval. Reversed installation will allow accumulated 
dirt to be drawn into the engine. 





Spark plugs, replacing 


High temperature and high-voltage sparks eventually wear 
out the spark plug electrodes, and the spark plugs must be re- 
placed. 


On M20 and M30 engines, gently remove the spark plug 
wire by pulling on the protective boot. Blow or brush away any 
dirt from around the base of the plug to prevent it from entering 
the engine when the plug is removed. 


On M50 and M60 engines, individual ignition coils are 
mounted above each spark plug. To access the plugs, the ig- 
nition coils must first be removed as described in 120 Ignition 
System—DME. 





CAUTION — 

Spark plugs should be replaced one at a time so 

that the spark plug wires do not get mixed up. If all 

of the wires need to be removed together, label 

each wire so that they can be reinstalled on the 
| correct spark plug. 





Use a 13/16 in. or 5/8 in. spark plug socket to remove spark 
plugs. The correct spark plugs for the different engines cov- 
ered by this manual are listed in Table i. Use a spark plug gap 
gauge to check the gap, if applicable. If necessary, bend the 
outer electrode slightly to adjust the gap to meet the specifica- 
tion. Do not bend or file the center electrode. 


MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 020-11 





Table f. Spark Plug Applications 














Model/ Spark plug Electrode gap 
Engine 
Bosch 
525i/M20 | W8LCRWSLPR* | 0.7-0.8mm 
| (.028-.032 in.) 
525i/M50 | F7LDCR ~ | Non-adjustable 
535i/M30 | W8LCR/W8 LPR’ | 0.7-0.8mm 
(.028-,032 in.) 
530i/M60 ' F7LDCR | Non-adjustable 
540i/M60 | F7LDCR ~ _ Non-adjustable 





Lightly lubricate the new spark plug threads with a little oil. 
Thread the plugs into the cylinder head by hand to prevent 
cross-threading. Torque the spark plugs. 





Tightening Torque 
* Spark plug to cylinder head........ 30 Nm (22 ft-lb) 





NOTE — 

Abnormal spark plug condition could also result from 
spark plugs of the wrong specification. Check replace- 
ment plugs carefully and follow the spark plug manu- 
facturer's recommendations. 


Distributor cap/rotor/spark plug wires, replacing 


The distributor cap, rotor, and spark plug wires deliver high- 
voltage spark to the spark plugs. They are subject to insula- 
tion breakdown, corrosion fouling, and electrode wear and 
damage. The components should be inspected and replaced 
as necessary at the intervals listed under Maintenance Ta- 
bles to ensure maximum engine efficiency. Guidelines for vi- 
sual inspection and testing, and instructions for replacement 
are found in 120 Ignition System—DME. 


Fuel filter, replacing 


The filter should be replaced at the specified interval. The 
fuel filter is located beneath the right rear of the car, just in 
front of the gas tank. See Fig. 7. 


NOTE — 


Some eight cylinder models (cars built from March 
1993) are equipped with two fuel filters. 


When replacing the fuel filter, disconnect the battery nega- 
tive (-) cable and clamp the filter inlet and outlet hoses to less- 
en fuel spillage. Loosen the clamping bracket and the two 
hose clamps on either end of the filter. Note the arrow or mark- 
ings indicating direction of flow on the new filter. Install the fil- 
ter and use new hose clamps. 





0011915 


Fig. 7. Fuel filter beneath car near right rear wheel. Direction of flow 
is indicated on filter housing. Loosen clamping bracket at filter 
center (A) and hose clamps (arrows). Replace hose clamps. 





WARNING — 

Fuel will be spilled when the filter is removed. Do 
not smoke or work near heaters or other fire haz- 
ards. Keep a tire extinguisher handy. 








CAUTION — 

Clean thoroughly around the filter connections be- 
fore removing. Make sure no dirt gets into the fuel 
lines. 











Valve clearance, adjusting (M20/M30 engines) 


1989-1990 525i models and all 535i models require period- 
ic valve clearance checking and adjusting. The complete 
valve adjustment procedure is covered in 116 Cylinder Head 
and Valvetrain. 


Camshaft drive belt, replacing (M20 engine) 


1989 and 1990 525i models use an overhead camshaft that 
is actuated by a toothed rubber drive belt. See Fig. 8. Due to 
belt composition and high under-hood temperatures, the belt 
is subject to wear. BMW recommends that the belt be re- 
placed at least every 50,000 miles, every four years, or any- 
time belt tension is relieved. See 118 Camshaft Timing Belt 
for belt replacement procedures. 





CAUTION — 
If the camshaft drive belt fails with the engine run- 
ning, the pistons will contact and bend the valves. 





ENGINE COMPARTMENT MAINTENANCE 


020-12 MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 













Camshaft 
sprocket 


Drive belt 





Drive belt Intermediate 
tensioner shaft 
sprocket 
Crankshaft 
sprocket 
8932. ENG.B 








Fig. 8. Camshaft drive belt configuration on M20 engine. 


Battery maintenance 


Simple maintenance of the battery and its terminal connec- 
tions will ensure maximum starting performance, especially in 
colder temperatures. For a more detailed discussion of the 
battery and charging system, see 121 Battery, Starter, Alter- 
nator. 


NOTE — 

The battery is mounted in one of two places, depending 
on models and mode! year. On most early cars, the bat- 
tery is in the front right corner of the engine compart- 
ment. On later cars, the battery is mounted beneath the 
rear seat. A secure battery hold-down is important in 
order to prevent vibrations and road shock from dam- 
aging the plates. 


Battery cable clamps should be tight. The terminals, the ca- 
ble clamps, and the battery case should be clean and free of 
white deposits. Even a thin layer of dust containing conductive 
acid salts can cause battery discharge. 


To remove battery corrosion, begin by disconnecting the 
cables. Disconnect the negative (-) cable first. Clean the ter- 
minal posts and the cable clamps with a wire brush. Clean the 
main chassis ground terminal next to the battery. 


Corrosion can be washed away with a baking soda and wa- 
ter solution that will neutralize the acid. Apply the solution 
carefully, though, since it will also neutralize the acid inside 
the battery. Reconnect the cable clamps, positive (+) cable 
first. Lightly coat the outside of the terminals, hold down 
screw, and clamps with petroleum jelly, grease, or a commer- 
cial battery terminal corrosion inhibitor. 


ENGINE COMPARTMENT MAINTENANCE 








WARNING — 


- Battery acid is caustic and dangerous. Take care 
to keep it from contacting eyes, skin, or clothing. 
Wear eye protection. Extinguish all smoking ma- 
terials and do not work near any open flames. 


+ Disconnecting the battery cables with the engine 
running, or reconnecting the cables to the incor- 
rect posts will damage the electrical system. 





« Be sure to have the radio code on hand before 
disconnecting battery. 





Battery electrolyte should be maintained at the correct level 
just above the battery plates and their separators. The correct 
level is approximately 5 mm (1/4 in.) above the top of battery 
plates or to the top of the indicator marks (if applicable). The 
battery plates and the indicator marks can be seen once the 
filler caps are removed. If the electrolyte level is low, replenish 
it by adding distilled water only. 


NOTE — 


Always disconnect the negative (—) cable first, and con- 
nect it last. 


Throttle housing and linkage, lubricating 


The linkage at the throttle housing should be lubricated at 
the intervals described under Maintenance Tables. Use a 
general purpose oil on the joints and bearings of the linkage. 
Use a multipurpose grease on the bearing points of the throt- 
tle plate. 


V-belts, checking and replacing 
(M20, M30 engines) 


V-belts should be inspected during regular maintenance in- 
tervals. Incorrect tension can decrease the life of the belt and 
the component it drives. Inspect belts with the engine off. 
Twist the belt to inspect its sidewalls and bottom. Belt structur- 
al damage, glazed or shiny sidewalls caused by a loose belt, 
or separation caused by oil contamination are all reasons to 
replace a belt. V-belt faults are illustrated in Fig. 9. 


Belt squealing is normally caused by loose belt tension. 
Loud squealing may only be corrected by belt replacement. 
Belt dressings should not be used to correct the problem. 


The V-belt tension is adjusted through a toothed-rack 
mechanism. Adjust V-belts by first loosening all of the mount- 
ing nuts/bolts until the unit pivots freely. Use a torque wrench 
and a crowfoot wrench to turn the tensioning gear bolt. Hold 
the wrench steady and tighten the locknut on the rear of the 
tensioning gear bolt. Tighten all other mounting nuts. 


NOTE — 


For the most accurate check, V-belt tension should be 
checked using a V-belt tension gauge. 


MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 020-1 3 











Tensile break 





Cracking 





Separation 








0011921 


Fig. 9. Examples of V-belt failure. Courtesy of Gates Rubber Inc. 





Tightening Torques 
* Tensioning gear (alternator 


BGI CENSIONING) cc si5:5 aereoe maarmerre 7 Nm (62 in-lb) 
* Tensioning gear (power steering 

belt tensioning)......... 8 to 8.5 Nm (71 to 75 in-lb) 
* Tensioning gear locking nut........ 24 Nm (18 ft-lb) 





Replacement of the V-belts every four years is recommend- 
ed. Loosen the mounting bolts and adjust until the belt tension 
is as loose as possible. Remove the belt by slipping it over the 
pulleys. In some cases it may be necessary to remove one V- 
belt to get to another. Cross section and length determine belt 
size. Use the old belt for comparison, or make sure that the 
new belt fits into the pulley groove. See Fig. 10. 


NOTE — 


When belts are replaced with new ones, store the old 
set in the luggage compartment for emergency use. 


When installing a new belt, gently pry it over the pulleys. 
Too much force may damage the belt or the accessory. Ten- 
sion the belt(s), run the engine for a few minutes (at least 1500 
rpm), then recheck the belt tension. 


am) (| | 


Correct Too low Too high 








Fig. 10. Cross-section of correct V-belt position in pulley. Courtesy of 
Gates Rubber Inc 





CAUTION — 
Do not over tighten the V-belts. Overtightening will 
cause shaft bearings to fail prematurely 





Poly-ribbed belts, checking and replacing 
(M50 and M60 engines) 


The automatic-tensioning poly-ribbed belt(s) should be in- 
spected during regular maintenance intervals. Inspect the belt 
with the engine off. Twist the belt to inspect its sidewalls and 
bottom. Belt structural damage, glazed or shiny contact sur- 
faces, cracking, or oil contamination are all reasons to replace 
a belt. 


To replace the belt on M50 motors, first pry out the cover 
from the front of the belt tensioner. Then use an 8mm allen 
socket to relieve the tension on the belt. See Fig. 11. Install 
the new belt with the tensioner in the released position. Install 
the dust cap to the tensioner once the belt is installed. 





80011027 
Fig. 11. Poly-ribbed drive belt being removed on M50 engine. Turn & 
mm hex wrench clockwise to relieve belt tension and then slip 

belt off pulleys. 


ENGINE COMPARTMENT MAINTENANCE 


020-14 MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 





To replace the poly-ribbed belts on M60 motors, loosen the 
mounting nuts on the belt tensioner. See Fig. 12.Then use an 
open end wrench to rotate the tensioner counterclockwise, re- 
leasing belt tension. Tighten the tensioner mounting nuts to 
hold the tensioner in position. Remove the belt. Install the new 
belt and then loosen the tensioner mounting nuts. Tighten the 
nuts once the belt is tensioned. 




















0011908 
Fig. 12. Drive belt tensioner on M60 engine. To relieve belt tension, 


loosen nuts (A) and turn hex (B) counterclockwise. Tighten 
nuts to hold tensioner in position. 


Cooling system maintenance 


Cooling system maintenance consists of maintaining the 
coolant and inspecting coolant hoses. Because the coolant's 
anti-corrosion and anti-freeze additives gradually lose their ef- 
fectiveness, replacement of the coolant every 2-3 years is rec- 
ommended. As a preventive measure, replacement of the 
cooling system hoses every 4 years is also recommended. 





CAUTION — 

Use only BMW-approved long life anti-freeze 
when filling the cooling system. Use of anti-freeze 
containing phosphates or a high silicate content is 
considered to be harmful to the cooling system. 





A translucent expansion tank, either on the left side of the 
radiator or in the rear of the engine compartment, provides 
easy monitoring of coolant level. Because the expansion tank 
is translucent, the coolant level can be checked visually with- 
out opening the system. 


Always check the coolant level with the engine cold. The 
coolant level should be at the maximum mark on the expan- 
sion tank. See Fig. 13. 


Coolant hose connections should be tight and dry. Coolant 
seepage indicates either that the hose clamp is loose, that the 
hose is damaged, or that the connection is dirty or corroded. 
Dried coolant has a chalky appearance. Hoses should be firm 


ENGINE COMPARTMENT MAINTENANCE 


\ 


/ 
/ 
y ' 
H 
: 


dl 


—_ 
~~ 
— 
i alll 
— 
—_ 


™ 
prey 


— 





0011917 


Fig. 13. Fill mark on coolant expansion tank on radiator. Coolant level 
should be at “cold” mark when engine is cold. 


and springy. Replace any hose that is cracked, that has be- 
come soft and limp, or has been contaminated by oil. See Fig. 
14. 








Oil damage 


Heat damage 


BS91.LUB.6 








B9110 


Fig. 14. Examples of damage to coolant hoses. Any of conditions 
shown is cause for replacement. Courtesy of Gates Rubber 
Inc. 


MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 020-15 





Power steering fluid level, checking 


Check the power steering fluid level in the fluid reservoir, 
just behind the fuse/relay panel. Park the car on level ground 
with the engine off. 


NOTE — 

The power steering system is filled with either ATF or 
CHF 7.1 hydraulic oil. The reservoir is marked with the 
type of oil used. 


The fluid level is correct if it is between the MAX and MIN 
marks on the dipstick. See Fig. 15. If the level is below the MIN 
mark, start the engine and add fluid to the reservoir to bring 
the level up. Stop the engine and recheck the level. Hand- 
tighten the reservoir cap. 





. 
0011914 


Fig. 15. Power steering fluid dipstick showing MIN and MAX marks. 


Brake/clutch fluid level, checking 


The level of the brake fluid will drop slightly as the brakes 
wear. Check the fluid level is between the MIN and MAX marks 
on the brake fluid reservoir. See Fig. 15. When filling the reser- 
voir, use only new brake fluid from previously unopened con- 
tainers. See Fluid and Lubricant Specifications. 


NOTE — 
* The brake fluid also serves as the hydraulic fluid for 
the clutch on cars with manual transmission. 


+ Low fluid level in the brake fluid reservoir may be due 
to leaks in the brake system or in the hydraulic clutch. 





0011918 


Fig. 16. Level indicators on brake fluid reservoir (arrows). Correct lev 
el is between MIN and MAX marks 


Oxygen sensor, replacing 


The oxygen sensor monitors engine combustion efficiency 
by measuring the oxygen content of the exhaust gasses. The 
output signal from the sensor is used to precisely control fuel 
delivery. Any problems with the oxygen sensor will directly af- 
fect exhaust emissions and the way the engine runs. 


The sensor is mounted in the exhaust pipe near the catalyt- 
ic convertor. See Fig. 17. For more information on testing the 
oxygen sensor system, see 130 Fuel injection—DME. 





WARNING — 
Allow exhaust system to cool thoroughly. 





1. To replace oxygen sensor, detach electrical harness 
connector, then unscrew sensor from exhaust pipe 














0011922 


Fig. 17. Oxygen sensor (arrow) is threaded into front exhaust pipe 
ahead of catalytic converter. 





Tightening Torque 
* Oxygen sensor 
to exhaust system .......-.. 55 + 5 Nm (40 +4 ft-lb) 





ENGINE COMPARTMENT MAINTENANCE 


020-16 MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 


NOTE — 

Special sockets for replacing the oxygen sensor are 
available from most automotive parts stores. The sock- 
et has a groove cut down one side to allow the sensor 
to be installed without damaging the wire harness. See 
010 Fundamentals for the Do-it-yourself Owner for 
information on sources. 


UNDER-CAR MAINTENANCE 


Tires, checking inflation pressure 


Correct tire inflation pressures are important to handling 
and stability, fuel economy, and tire wear. Tire pressures 
change with temperature. Pressures should be checked often 
during seasonal temperature changes. Correct inflation pres- 
sures can be found on the driver's door pillar and in the own- 
ers manual. Note that tire pressures should be higher when 
the car is more heavily loaded. 





WARNING — 


Do not inflate any tire to a higher pressure than the 
tires maximum inflation pressure listed on the side- 
wall. Use care when adding air to warm tires. Warm 
tire pressures can increase as much as 4 psi (0.3 
bar) over their cold pressures. 





Tires, rotating 


BMW does not recommend tire rotation. Owing to the car's 
suspension design, the front tires begin to wear first at the out- 
er shoulder and the rear tires begin to wear first at the middle 
of the tread or inner shoulder. Rotating the tires may adverse- 
ly affect road handling and tire grip. 


NOTE — 


The main purpose of tire rotation is to promote even 
wear and maximum tire life. Tire life may be decreased 
slightly if the tires are not rotated. 


Wheels, aligning 


BMW recommends checking the front and rear alignment 
once a year and whenever new tires are installed. See 320 
Steering and wheel alignment for a more detailed discus- 
sion of alignment requirements and specifications. 


Brake system, inspecting 


Routine maintenance of the brake system includes main- 
taining an adequate level of brake fluid in the reservoir, check- 
ing brake pads for wear, checking hand brake function, and 
inspecting the system for fluid leaks or other damage. 


UNDER-CAR MAINTENANCE 








WARNING — 


+ Friction materials such as brake linings may con- 
tain asbestos fibers. Do not create dust by grind- 
ing, sanding, or cleaning the pads with 
compressed air. Avoid breathing asbestos fibers 
and asbestos dust, as it may result in serious dis- 
eases such as asbestosis and cancer, or in 
death. 


* Brake fluid is poisonous. Do not siphon brake flu- 
id by mouth. Wear gloves when working with 
brake fluid or brake pads to prevent contamina- 
tion of cuts. 








Brake hoses and lines, inspecting 


Check that all brake hoses are correctly routed to avoid 
chafing or kinking. Inspect unions and brake calipers for signs 
of fluid leaks. Inspect rigid lines for corrosion, dents, or other 
damage. Inspect flexible hoses for cracking. Replace faulty 
hoses or lines as described in 340 Brakes. 


WARNING — 
Incorrect installation or overtightening hoses, lines, 


and unions may cause chafing or leakage. This can 
lead to partial or complete brake system failure. 





Brake pad/rotor wear, checking 


Although the cars covered by this manual are equipped with 
a brake pad warning system, the system only monitors one 
wheel per axle. There can be slight variations in brake pad 
wear at each wheel, so brake pad thickness should be 
checked whenever the wheels are off or brake work is being 
done. 


The brake caliper should be removed to properly inspect 
the brake pads and the rotors. Brake caliper removal and in- 
Stallation procedures are given in 340 Brakes. See Fig. 18. 





Brake Pad Lining Minimum Thickness 
(Dimension A) 


* Front and rear disc brake pads. ..... 2.0 mm (0.08 in) 


NOTE — 


For parking brake lining wear, see Parking Brake, 
checking below. 


MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 020-17 











0011920 


Fig. 18. Disc brake caliper removed to inspect brake pad thickness. 
Minimurn brake pad thickness shown by dimension A. 


Brake fluid, replacing 


BMW strictly recommends replacing the brake fluid every 
year. This will help protect against corrosion and the effects of 
moisture in the fluid. See 340 Brakes for brake fluid flushing 
procedures. 


Parking brake, checking 


The parking brake system is independent of the main brak- 
ing system and may require periodic adjustment depending 
on use. Adjust the parking brake if the brake lever can be 
pulled up more than 8 clicks on the ratchet mechanism. Check 
that the cable moves freely. A complete description of the 
parking brake and parking brake adjustment can be found in 
340 Brakes. 


NOTE — 


The parking brake may lose some of its effectiveness 
over time if it is not used frequently. This is due to cor- 
rosion build-up on the parking brake drum. To remove 
corrosion, apply the parking brake just until it begins to 
grip, then pull the lever up one more stop (click), Drive 
the car approximately 400 meters (1,300 ft.) and re- 
lease the brake. To recheck the adjustment of the park- 
ing brake see 340 Brakes. 


Exhaust system, inspecting 


Exhaust system life varies widely according to driving hab- 
its and environmental conditions. If short-distance driving pre- 
dominates, the moisture and condensation in the system will 
not fully dry out. This will lead to early corrosion damage and 
more frequent replacement. 


Scheduled maintenance of the exhaust system is limited to 
inspection. Check for restrictions due to dents or kinks. Check 
for weakness or perforation due to rust. Check to see that all 
the hangers are in place and properly supporting the system 
and that the system does not strike the body. Alignment of the 
system and the location of the hangers are described in 180 
Exhaust System. 


Manual Transmission Service 


Manual transmission service consists of inspecting for 
leaks, checking and changing the gear oil, checking the clutch 
fluid level, and checking the clutch disc for wear. 


Evidence of transmission leaks is most likely to be seen 
around the drive shaft mounting flange, and at the bottom of 
the bellhousing between the transmission and the engine. For 
more information on identifying oil leaks and their causes, see 
230 Manual Transmission and 210 Clutch. 


Manual transmission oil, checking and filling 


BMW recommends checking the manual transmission oil 
level and changing the oil at specified intervals. Check and fill 
the transmission with the car on a level surface. Transmission 
oil level checking and oil replacement procedures are covered 
in 230 Manual Transmission. 


Automatic transmission service 


Many different automatic transmissions are used in the cars 
covered by this manual, depending on engine and model 
year. Some early transmissions are equipped with a dipstick, 
while most later transmissions are not. On automatic trans- 
missions not equipped with a dipstick, checking the ATF level 
is an involved procedure that requires measuring and main- 
taining a specified ATF temperature during the checking pro- 
cedure. 


NOTE — 


Some automatic transmissions use a special ATF oil 
that does not require changing for the life of the trans- 
mission. 


For complete ATF service, including checking ATF level 


and ATF filter replacement procedures, see 240 Automatic 
Transmission. 


UNDER-CAR MAINTENANCE 


020-18 MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 





Front suspension and steering linkages, 
inspecting 


Inspection of the front suspension and steering includes a 
check of all moving parts for wear and excessive play. Also in- 
spect the rubber seals and boots for cracks or tears that could 
allow the entry of dirt, water, and other contaminants. See 310 
Front Suspension. 


Rear suspension, inspecting 


Final drive and rear drive axle service consists of checking 
and changing the gear oil, inspecting for leaks, and checking 
the rear drive axle rubber boots for damage. 


The areas where leaks are most likely to occur are around 
the drive shaft and drive axle mounting flanges. For more in- 
formation on identifying oil leaks and their causes, see 330 
Rear Suspension and 331 Final Drive. 


Final drive oil level, checking 


Check the lubricant level with the car level. Remove the oil 
filler plug. The level is correct when the fluid just reaches the 
edge of the filler hole. See Fig. 19. Install and tighten the oil fill- 
er plug when the oil level is correct. 


Oil specifications vary depending on type of final drive unit 
installed. See 331 Final Drive for more information. 





Tightening Torque 


+ Final drive filler plug to final 
GHVE HQUSIG oss aan conemaommmies we 70 Nm (52 ft-lb) 














0011744 








0011744 
Fig. 19. Final drive drain plug (A) and fill plug (B). 


BODY AND INTERIOR MAINTENANCE 





NOTE — 

* Use a 14 mm or 17 mm allen bit socket to remove the 
drain plug. Alternatively, cut approximately 30 mm 
(1.2 in.) from an allen key and use and open end 
wrench on the key stub. 


+ If the car is raised in the air, it should be on a level plane. 


* To identify the type of differential (limited slip vs. open), 
locate the sheet metal data tag on the left-hand rear 
side of the final drive unit. This tag identifies the type 
and final drive ratio. For example S 3,10 means that it 
is a limited slip differential (S) with a 3.10 final ratio. 


Drive axle boots, inspecting 


The rear drive axle protective boots should be inspected for 
cracks and any other damage that will allow contaminants to 
get into the joint. If the rubber boots fail, the water and dirt that 
enters the joint will quickly damage it. Replacement of the 
drive axle joint boots and inspection of the joints are described 
in 330 Rear Suspension. 


Fuel tank and fuel lines, inspecting 


Inspect the fuel tank, fuel lines, and fuel system for damage 
or leaks. Check for fuel leaks in the engine compartment or 
fuel odors in the passenger compartment. Check for faulty 
fuel lines by bending them. If any leaks are present, fuel 
should be expelled. Check for a damaged fuel tank. Incorrect- 
ly raising the car can damage the tank. Check for any evapo- 
rative emissions hoses that may have become disconnected, 
checking carefully at the charcoal canister and evaporative 
emissions purge valve (where applicable). See 130 Fuel In- 
jection—DME and 160 Fuel Tank and Fuel Pump for compo- 
nent locations and additional information. 





WARNING — 

When checking for fuel leaks, the engine must be 
cold. A hot exhaust manifold or exhaust system 
could cause the fuel to ignite or explode causing se- 
rious personal injury. Ventilate the work area and 
clean up spilled fuel immediately. 








BODY AND INTERIOR MAINTENANCE 


Windshield wiper blades, replacing 


BMW recommends replacing the wipers blades at specified 
time intervals. Normally twice a year (before and after the cold 
season) works well. See 611 Wipers and Washers for more 
information wiper troubleshooting and wiper blade replace- 
ment. 


NOTE — 

When replacing the wiper blades, check the tightness of 
the wipers arm nuts. Loose wiper arms can lead to dam- 
aged wiper linkages. If found to be loose, tighten the nuts 
to the torque listed in 611 Wipers and Washers. 


HVAC micro-filter, replacing 
(1991 and later cars) 


The ventilation system intake air filters pollen and airborne 
particles from the air before it enters the passenger compart- 
ment. The paper-element should be replaced at every inspec- 
tion |, or every 15K miles. A dirty filter will restrict air flow into 
the passenger compartment and lead to poor performance of 
the HVAC system. HVAC microfilter replacement is covered 
in 640 Heating and Air Conditioning. 


Body Lubrication 


The body and door hinges, the hood latch, and the door 
check rods can be lubricated with a medium weight engine oil. 
Lubricate the seat runners with multipurpose grease. 


Lubricate the sunroof guide rails with silicone spray. If door 
weatherstrips are sticking, lubricate them with silicone spray 
or talcum powder. Do not apply any oil to rubber parts. 


The hood release cable should be lubricated as well. The 
radio antenna mast should be cleaned and lubricated with a 
product such as WD-40°, 


The door locks and lock cylinders can be lubricated with an 
oil that contains graphite. Such a lubricant is available from 
BMW, Part No. 81 22 9 407 421 


Seat Belts 


Dirt and other abrasive particles will damage seat belt web- 
bing. If it is necessary to clean seat belts, use a mild soap so- 
lution. Bleach and other strong cleaning agents may weaken 
the belt webbing. 











WARNING — 
Do not clean the seat belt webbing using dry clean- 
ing or other chemicals. Allow wet belts to dry before 
allowing them to retract. 





The condition of the belt webbing and the function of the re- 
tractor mechanisms should be inspected. See 720 Seat Belts 
for seat belt inspection information. 


MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 020-19 





CLEANING AND PRESERVING 


Exterior finish care 


The longer dirt is left on the paint, the greater the risk of 
damaging the glossy finish, either by scratching or by the 
chemical effect dirt particles may have on the painted surface. 


Washing 


Do not wash the car in direct sunlight. If the engine hood is 
warm, allow it to cool. Beads of water not only leave spots 
when dried rapidly by the sun or heat from the engine, but also 
act as tiny magnifying glasses that can burn spots into the fin- 
ish. Wash the car with a mixture of lukewarm water and a mild 
soap made expressly for washing cars. Rinse using plenty of 
clear water under as little pressure as possible. Wipe the body 
dry with a soft terry-cloth towel or chamois to prevent water- 
spotting. 


Waxing 


For a long-lasting, protective, and glossy finish, apply a 
hard wax after the car has been washed and dried. Use car- 
nauba or synthetic based products. Waxing is not needed af- 
ter every washing. You can tell when waxing is required by 
looking at the finish when it is wet. If the water coats the paint 
in smooth sheets instead of forming beads that roll off, a new 
coat of wax is needed. Wax should not be applied to black trim 
pieces, rubber, or other plastic parts. 


Chassis washing 


Periodic washing of the underside of the car, especially in 
Winter, will help prevent accumulation of road salt and rust. The 
best time to wash the underside is just after the car has been 
driven in wet conditions. Spray the chassis with a powerful jet of 
water. Commercial or self-service car washes may not be best 
for this, as they may recycle the salt-contaminated water. 


Special cleaning 


Tar and insect spots can be removed with a bug and tar re- 
mover. Never use gasoline, kerosene, nail polish remover, or 
other unsuitable solvents. This method can also be used to re- 
move spotting from tree sap. 


CLEANING AND PRESERVING 


020-20 MAINTENANCE PROGRAM 





Interior care 


Dirt spots can usually be removed with lukewarm soapy wa- 
ter. Use spot remover for grease and oil spots. Do not pour the 
liquid directly on the carpet, but dampen a clean cloth and rub 
carefully, starting at the edge of the spot and working inward. 
Do not use gasoline, naptha, or other flammable substances 
to clean the carpeting. 


Vinyl and cloth upholstery and trim 


Use a dry foam cleaner. Grease or paint spots can be re- 
moved by wiping with a cloth soaked with this cleaner. Use the 
same cleaner, applied with a soft cloth or brush, on the head- 
liner and side trim panels. For cloth-covered seat areas, use 
the techniques described previously for cleaning the carpet- 
ing. 


Leather upholstery and trim 


Leather upholstery and trim should be periodically cleaned 
using a slightly damp cotton or wool cloth. The idea is to get rid 
of the dirt in the creases and pores that can cause brittleness 
and premature aging. On heavily soiled areas, use a mild de- 
tergent (such as Woolite®). Use two tablespoons to one quart 
of cold water. Dry the trim and upholstery completely using a 
soft cloth. Regular use of a good quality leather conditioner 
will reduce drying and cracking of the leather. 