Chapter 4 


MAINTENANCE 
AND TROUBLESHOOTING 



Subjects covered in Chapter 4 include — 

• Cleaning the printer 

• Replacing the ribbon 

• Replacing the print head 

• Troubleshooting 

Dust and heat will make any mechanism wear more quickly. The best 
maintenance is preventive, and the first step is correct location of the printer. 
This is covered in greater detail in Chapter 1, but in general an environment 
comfortable for humans is best for both the computer and the printer. 


CLEANING THE PRINTER 

Cleaning the printer regularly will prolong its service life. Use a damp 
cloth on the exterior every week or so. For stubborn dirt, you may moisten 
the cloth with alcohol or water containing a mild detergent, but be careful 
not to spill any liquid into the interior of the printer. 

Use a soft brush to remove paper dust and lint from the interior. A small 
vacuum cleaner can also make this task easier, but be very careful not to 
bend or injure any electronic parts or wiring. The printer contains delicate 
electronic parts, so only clean those places where you have easy access. 


REPLACING THE RIBBON 


The printer uses an endless-type colour ribbon cartridge in which the 
ribbon is recycled automatically. When the print becomes faint, it is time 
to replace the ribbon cartridge. 


To remove the old cartridge, take off the top cover and press the ribbon 
release catch toward you with your index finger. Once the ribbon is free 
of the print head, the cartridge lifts out easily. To fit the new cartridge, guide 
the ribbon between the print head and the metal platen guard, then set the 
cartridge in place on the carriage and press down lightly. The release catch 
will lock automatically. See Figure 4-1. 



Ribbon cartridge 



Figure 4-1. Replacing the ribbon cartridge 


REPLACING THE PRINT HEAD 

The dot matrix print head has a life of about 200 million dots, or years 
of normal use. When printing is too light even after replacing the ribbon, 
you’ll know that the print head has reached the end of its service life. To 
replace the print head, follow the procedure below. 

As you remove the old print head, note carefully how the cable is 
threaded, so that you can thread the new cable in the same way. 

Caution: When replacing the print head, be careful not to touch the brass 

gear on the carriage. 

Warning: The print head becomes hot during operation. If you have been 

using the printer, wait awhile so that the print head can cool 

off. 

1. Turn power OFF and unplug the power cord. 

2. Remove the top cover and ribbon cartridge. 

3. Move the print head carriage toward the right until you can see the 
connector cover. Remove the connector covei and pull the cable tree 

from the connector. 

4. Remove the gear cover by pushing the fulcrums on both sides. At this 
time, take care not to lose the spring. 

5. Unscrew the two screws that hold the print head in place and set them 
aside. 




6 . 


Disengage the cable from the tabs holding it down, then remove the 
print head. 


7. 


I-- **^" x ** 

bor easy installation of the new print head, move the carriage toward 
the left end of the rail. 


-- AUUi 

8. Place the new print head on its support, seating it on the two pins. 

9. Thread the new cable the same way as the old, securing it under the 
tabs on the print head carriage. 



Figure 4-2. Replacing the print head 

10. Plug the cable into the connector, inserting it as far as it will go. 

11. Fasten the print head down with the two screws. 

12. Replace the spring and the gear cover in place. 

13. Move the carriage back toward the right and replace the connector cover. 
Slide the connector cover to the left until it locks into place. 

14. Replace the ribbon cartridge and top cover, and plug the power cord 
back in. 